1. 'What is the price of Experience? do men buy it for a song?
2. Or wisdom for a dance in the street? No, it is bought with the price
3. Of all that a man hath, his house, his wife, his children.
4. Wisdom is sold in the desolate market where none come to buy,
5. And in the wither'd field where the farmer plows for bread in vain.

6. It is an easy thing to triumph in the summer's sun
7. And in the vintage and to sing on the waggon loaded with corn.
8. It is an easy thing to talk of patience to the afflicted,
9. To speak the laws of prudence to the houseless wanderer,
10. To listen to the hungry raven's cry in wintry season
11. When the red blood is fill'd with wine and with the marrow of lambs.

12. It is an easy thing to laugh at wrathful elements,
13. To hear the dog howl at the wintry door, the ox in the slaughter house moan;
14. To see a god on every wind and a blessing on every blast;
15. To hear sounds of love in the thunder storm that destroys our enemies' house;
16. To rejoice in the blight that covers his field, and the sickness that cuts off his children,
17. While our olive and vine sing and laugh round our door, and our children bring fruits and flowers.

18. Then the groan and the dolor are quite forgotten, and the slave grinding at the mill,
19. And the captive in chains, and the poor in the prison, and the soldier in the field
20. When the shatter'd bone hath laid him groaning among the happier dead.

21. It is an easy thing to rejoice in the tents of prosperity:
22. Thus could I sing and thus rejoice: but it is not so with me.'

23. 'Compel the poor to live upon a crust of bread, by soft mild arts.
24. Smile when they frown, frown when they smile; and when a man looks pale
25. With labour and abstinence, say he looks healthy and happy;
26. And when his children sicken, let them die; there are enough
27. Born, even too many, and our earth will be overrun
28. Without these arts. If you would make the poor live with temper,
29. With pomp give every crust of bread you give; with gracious cunning
30. Magnify small gifts; reduce the man to want a gift, and then give with pomp.
31. Say he smiles if you hear him sigh. If pale, say he is ruddy.
32. Preach temperance: say he is overgorg'd and drowns his wit
33. In strong drink, though you know that bread and water are all
34. He can afford. Flatter his wife, pity his children, till we can
35. Reduce all to our will, as spaniels are taught with art.'

36. The sun has left his blackness and has found a fresher morning,
37. And the mild moon rejoices in the clear and cloudless night,
38. And Man walks forth from midst of the fires: the evil is all consum'd.
39. His eyes behold the Angelic spheres arising night and day;
40. The stars consum'd like a lamp blown out, and in their stead, behold
41. The expanding eyes of Man behold the depths of wondrous worlds!
42. One Earth, one sea beneath; nor erring globes wander, but stars
43. Of fire rise up nightly from the ocean; and one sun
44. Each morning, like a new born man, issues with songs and joy
45. Calling the Plowman to his labour and the Shepherd to his rest.
46. He walks upon the Eternal Mountains, raising his heavenly voice,
47. Conversing with the animal forms of wisdom night and day,
48. That, risen from the sea of fire, renew'd walk o'er the Earth;
49. For Tharmas brought his flocks upon the hills, and in the vales
50. Around the Eternal Man's bright tent, the little children play
51. Among the woolly flocks. The hammer of Urthona sounds
52. In the deep caves beneath; his limbs renew'd, his Lions roar
53. Around the Furnaces and in evening sport upon the plains.
54. They raise their faces from the earth, conversing with the Man:

55. 'How is it we have walk'd through fires and yet are not consum'd?
56. How is it that all things are chang'd, even as in ancient times?'