1. Through throats where many rivers meet, the curlews cry,
2. Under the conceiving moon, on the high chalk hill,
3. And there this night I walk in the white giant's thigh
4. Where barren as boulders women lie longing still

5. To labour and love though they lay down long ago.

6. Through throats where many many rivers meet, the women pray,
7. Pleading in the waded bay for the seed to flow
8. Though the names on their weed grown stones are rained away,

9. And alone in the night's eternal, curving act
10. They yearn with tongues of curlews for the unconceived
11. And immemorial sons of the cudgelling, hacked

12. Hill. Who once in gooseskin winter loved all ice leaved
13. In the courters' lanes, or twined in the ox roasting sun
14. In the wains tonned so high that the wisps of the hay
15. Clung to the pitching clouds, or gay with any one
16. Young as they in the after milking moonlight lay

17. Under the lighted shapes of faith and their moonshade
18. Petticoats galed high, or shy with the rough riding boys,
19. Now clasp me to their grains in the gigantic glade,

20. Who once, green countries since, were a hedgerow of joys.

21. Time by, their dust was flesh the swineherd rooted sly,
22. Flared in the reek of the wiving sty with the rush
23. Light of his thighs, spreadeagle to the dunghill sky,
24. Or with their orchard man in the core of the sun's bush
25. Rough as cows' tongues and thrashed with brambles their buttermilk
26. Manes, under the quenchless summer barbed gold to the bone,

27. Or rippling soft in the spinney moon as the silk
28. And ducked and draked white lake that harps to a hail stone.

29. Who once were a bloom of wayside brides in the hawed house
30. And heard the lewd, wooed field flow to the coming frost,
31. The scurrying, furred small friars squeal, in the dowse
32. Of day, in the thistle aisles, till the white owl crossed

33. Their breast, the vaulting does roister, the horned bucks climb
34. Quick in the wood at love, where a torch of foxes foams,
35. All birds and beasts of the linked night uproar and chime

36. And the mole snout blunt under his pilgrimage of domes,
37. Or, butter fat goosegirls, bounced in a gambo bed,
38. Their breasts full of honey, under their gander king
39. Trounced by his wings in the hissing shippen, long dead
40. And gone that barley dark where their clogs danced in the spring,
41. And their firefly hairpins flew, and the ricks ran round--

42. (But nothing bore, no mouthing babe to the veined hives
43. Hugged, and barren and bare on Mother Goose's ground
44. They with the simple Jacks were a boulder of wives)--

45. Now curlew cry me down to kiss the mouths of their dust.

46. The dust of their kettles and clocks swings to and fro
47. Where the hay rides now or the bracken kitchens rust
48. As the arc of the billhooks that flashed the hedges low
49. And cut the birds' boughs that the minstrel sap ran red.
50. They from houses where the harvest kneels, hold me hard,
51. Who heard the tall bell sail down the Sundays of the dead
52. And the rain wring out its tongues on the faded yard,
53. Teach me the love that is evergreen after the fall leaved
54. Grave, after Belovéd on the grass gulfed cross is scrubbed
55. Off by the sun and Daughters no longer grieved
56. Save by their long desires in the fox cubbed
57. Streets or hungering in the crumbled wood: to these
58. Hale dead and deathless do the women of the hill
59. Love for ever meridian through the courters' trees

60. And the daughters of darkness flame like Fawkes fires still.