1. And there was silence in the House of Judgment, and the Man came
2. naked before God.

3. And God opened the Book of the Life of the Man.

4. And God said to the Man, 'Thy life hath been evil, and thou hast
5. shown cruelty to those who were in need of succour, and to those
6. who lacked help thou hast been bitter and hard of heart. The poor
7. called to thee and thou didst not hearken, and thine ears were
8. closed to the cry of My afflicted. The inheritance of the
9. fatherless thou didst take unto thyself, and thou didst send the
10. foxes into the vineyard of thy neighbour's field. Thou didst take
11. the bread of the children and give it to the dogs to eat, and My
12. lepers who lived in the marshes, and were at peace and praised Me,
13. thou didst drive forth on to the highways, and on Mine earth out of
14. which I made thee thou didst spill innocent blood.'

15. And the Man made answer and said, 'Even so did I.'

16. And again God opened the Book of the Life of the Man.

17. And God said to the Man, 'Thy life hath been evil, and the Beauty I
18. have shown thou hast sought for, and the Good I have hidden thou
19. didst pass by. The walls of thy chamber were painted with images,

20. and from the bed of thine abominations thou didst rise up to the
21. sound of flutes. Thou didst build seven altars to the sins I have
22. suffered, and didst eat of the thing that may not be eaten, and the
23. purple of thy raiment was broidered with the three signs of shame.
24. Thine idols were neither of gold nor of silver that endure, but of
25. flesh that dieth. Thou didst stain their hair with perfumes and
26. put pomegranates in their hands. Thou didst stain their feet with
27. saffron and spread carpets before them. With antimony thou didst
28. stain their eyelids and their bodies thou didst smear with myrrh.
29. Thou didst bow thyself to the ground before them, and the thrones
30. of thine idols were set in the sun. Thou didst show to the sun thy
31. shame and to the moon thy madness.'

32. And the Man made answer and said, 'Even so did I.'

33. And a third time God opened the Book of the Life of the Man.

34. And God said to the Man, 'Evil hath been thy life, and with evil
35. didst thou requite good, and with wrongdoing kindness. The hands
36. that fed thee thou didst wound, and the breasts that gave thee suck
37. thou didst despise. He who came to thee with water went away
38. thirsting, and the outlawed men who hid thee in their tents at
39. night thou didst betray before dawn. Thine enemy who spared thee
40. thou didst snare in an ambush, and the friend who walked with thee
41. thou didst sell for a price, and to those who brought thee Love
42. thou didst ever give Lust in thy turn.'

43. And the Man made answer and said, 'Even so did I.'

44. And God closed the Book of the Life of the Man, and said, 'Surely I
45. will send thee into Hell. Even into Hell will I send thee.'

46. And the Man cried out, 'Thou canst not.'

47. And God said to the Man, 'Wherefore can I not send thee to Hell,
48. and for what reason?'

49. 'Because in Hell have I always lived,' answered the Man.

50. And there was silence in the House of Judgment.
51. And after a space God spake, and said to the Man, 'Seeing that I
52. may not send thee into Hell, surely I will send thee unto Heaven.
53. Even unto Heaven will I send thee.'

54. And the Man cried out, 'Thou canst not.'

55. And God said to the Man, 'Wherefore can I not send thee unto
56. Heaven, and for what reason?'

57. 'Because never, and in no place, have I been able to imagine it,'
58. answered the Man.

59. And there was silence in the House of Judgment.