1. It was night-time and He was alone.

2. And He saw afar-off the walls of a round city and went towards the
3. city.

4. And when He came near He heard within the city the tread of the
5. feet of joy, and the laughter of the mouth of gladness and the loud
6. noise of many lutes. And He knocked at the gate and certain of the
7. gate-keepers opened to Him.

8. And He beheld a house that was of marble and had fair pillars of
9. marble before it. The pillars were hung with garlands, and within
10. and without there were torches of cedar. And He entered the house.

11. And when He had passed through the hall of chalcedony and the hall
12. of jasper, and reached the long hall of feasting, He saw lying on a
13. couch of sea-purple one whose hair was crowned with red roses and
14. whose lips were red with wine.

15. And He went behind him and touched him on the shoulder and said to
16. him, 'Why do you live like this?'

17. And the young man turned round and recognised Him, and made answer
18. and said, 'But I was a leper once, and you healed me. How else
19. should I live?'

20. And He passed out of the house and went again into the street.

21. And after a little while He saw one whose face and raiment were
22. painted and whose feet were shod with pearls. And behind her came,
23. slowly as a hunter, a young man who wore a cloak of two colours.
24. Now the face of the woman was as the fair face of an idol, and the
25. eyes of the young man were bright with lust.

26. And He followed swiftly and touched the hand of the young man and
27. said to him, 'Why do you look at this woman and in such wise?'

28. And the young man turned round and recognised Him and said, 'But I
29. was blind once, and you gave me sight. At what else should I
30. look?'

31. And He ran forward and touched the painted raiment of the woman and
32. said to her, 'Is there no other way in which to walk save the way
33. of sin?'

34. And the woman turned round and recognised Him, and laughed and
35. said, 'But you forgave me my sins, and the way is a pleasant way.'

36. And He passed out of the city.

37. And when He had passed out of the city He saw seated by the
38. roadside a young man who was weeping.

39. And He went towards him and touched the long locks of his hair and
40. said to him, 'Why are you weeping?'

41. And the young man looked up and recognised Him and made answer,
42. 'But I was dead once, and you raised me from the dead. What else
43. should I do but weep?'