1. WHAT crowd is this? what have we here! we must not pass it by;
2. A Telescope upon its frame, and pointed to the sky:
3. Long is it as a barber's pole, or mast of little boat,
4. Some little pleasure-skiff, that doth on Thames's waters float.

5. The Showman chooses well his place, 'tis Leicester's busy Square;
6. And is as happy in his night, for the heavens are blue and fair;
7. Calm, though impatient, is the crowd; each stands ready with the fee,
8. And envies him that's looking;--what an insight must it be!

9. Yet, Showman, where can lie the cause? Shall thy Implement have blame,
10. A boaster, that when he is tried, fails, and is put to shame?
11. Or is it good as others are, and be their eyes in fault?
12. Their eyes, or minds? or, finally, is yon resplendent vault?

13. Is nothing of that radiant pomp so good as we have here?
14. Or gives a thing but small delight that never can be dear?
15. The silver moon with all her vales, and hills of mightiest fame,
16. Doth she betray us when they're seen? or are they but a name?

17. Or is it rather that Conceit rapacious is and strong,
18. And bounty never yields so much but it seems to do her wrong?
19. Or is it, that when human Souls a journey long have had
20. And are returned into themselves, they cannot but be sad?

21. Or must we be constrained to think that these Spectators rude,
22. Poor in estate, of manners base, men of the multitude,
23. Have souls which never yet have risen, and therefore prostrate lie?
24. No, no, this cannot be;--men thirst for power and majesty!

25. Does, then, a deep and earnest thought the blissful mind employ
26. Of him who gazes, or has gazed? a grave and steady joy,
27. That doth reject all show of pride, admits no outward sign,
28. Because not of this noisy world, but silent and divine!

29. Whatever be the cause, 'tis sure that they who pry and pore
30. Seem to meet with little gain, seem less happy than before:
31. One after One they take their turn, nor have I one espied
32. That doth not slackly go away, as if dissatisfied.