1. O span of youth! ever-push'd elasticity!
2. O manhood, balanced, florid and full.

3. My lovers suffocate me,
4. Crowding my lips, thick in the pores of my skin,
5. Jostling me through streets and public halls, coming naked to me at night,
6. Crying by day Ahoy! from the rocks of the river, swinging and chirping over my head,
7. Calling my name from flower-beds, vines, tangled underbrush,
8. Lighting on every moment of my life,
9. Bussing my body with soft balsamic busses,
10. Noiselessly passing handfuls out of their hearts and giving them to be mine.

11. Old age superbly rising! O welcome, ineffable grace of dying days!

12. Every condition promulges not only itself, it promulges what grows after and out of itself,
13. And the dark hush promulges as much as any.

14. I open my scuttle at night and see the far-sprinkled systems,
15. And all I see multiplied as high as I can cipher edge but the rim of the farther systems.

16. Wider and wider they spread, expanding, always expanding,
17. Outward and outward and forever outward.
18. My sun has his sun and round him obediently wheels,
19. He joins with his partners a group of superior circuit,
20. And greater sets follow, making specks of the greatest inside them.

21. There is no stoppage and never can be stoppage,
22. If I, you, and the worlds, and all beneath or upon their surfaces,
23. were this moment reduced back to a pallid float, it would not avail in the long run,
24. We should surely bring up again where we now stand,
25. And surely go as much farther, and then farther and farther.

26. A few quadrillions of eras, a few octillions of cubic leagues, do not hazard the span or make it impatient,
27. They are but parts, any thing is but a part.

28. See ever so far, there is limitless space outside of that,
29. Count ever so much, there is limitless time around that.

30. My rendezvous is appointed, it is certain,
31. The Lord will be there and wait till I come on perfect terms,
32. The great Camerado, the lover true for whom I pine will be there.