1. "Why is my District death-rate low?"
2. Said Binks of Hezabad.
3. "Well, drains, and sewage-outfalls are
4. "My own peculiar fad.
5. "I learnt a lesson once, It ran
6. "Thus," quoth that most veracious man: --


7. It was an August evening and, in snowy garments clad,
8. I paid a round of visits in the lines of Hezabad;
9. When, presently, my Waler saw, and did not like at all,
10. A Commissariat elephant careering down the Mall.

11. I couldn't see he driver, and across my mind it rushed
12. That that Commissariat elephant had suddenly gone musth.
13. I didn't care to meet him, and I couldn't well get down,
14. So I let the Waler have it, and we headed for the town.

15. The buggy was a new one and, praise Dykes, it stood the strain,
16. Till he Waler jumped a bullock just above the City Drain;
17. And the next that I remember was a hurricane of squeals,
18. And the creature making toothpicks of my five-foot patent wheels.

19. He seemed to want the owner, so I fled, distraught with fear,
20. To the Main Drain sewage-outfall while he snorted in my ear --
21. Reached the four-foot drain-head safely and, in darkness and despair,
22. Felt the brute's proboscis fingering my terror-stiffened hair.

23. Heard it trumpet on my shoulder -- tried to crawl a little higher --
24. Found the Main Drain sewage outfall blocked, some eight feet up, with mire;
25. And, for twenty reeking minutes, Sir, my very marrow froze,
26. While the trunk was feeling blindly for a purchase on my toes!

27. It missed me by a fraction, but my hair was turning grey
28. Before they called the drivers up and dragged the brute away.
29. Then I sought the City Elders, and my words were very plain.
30. They flushed that four-foot drain-head and -- it never choked again!

31. You may hold with surface-drainage, and the sun-for-garbage cure,
32. Till you've been a periwinkle shrinking coyly up a sewer.
33. I believe in well-flushed culverts. . . .
34. This is why the death-rate's small;
35. And, if you don't believe me, get shikarred yourself. That's all.